#####<a name="v"></a>v

In the year 1842, a most generous offer made to me by the present Duke of Northumberland (then Lord Prudhoe) enabled me to undertake the composition of this work; and to His Grace's princely aid I have ever since been mainly indebted for the means of accomplishing the project thus originated.

   The object proposed was not to do in English little more than what Golius and others had already done in Latin, by translating and composing from a few Arabic lexicons of the class of epitomes or abstracts or manuals; but to draw chiefly from the most copious Eastern sources; one of which, comprising in about one seventh part of its contents the whole of the celebrated Ḳámoos, I knew to exist in Cairo. There, also, I had reason to believe that I might find other sources unknown in  Europe, and obtain more aid in the prosecution of my design than I could elsewhere; and thither, therefore, I betook myself for this purpose.

   On my arrival at Cairo, I first had recourse, for help in making my preparations, to an accomplished Arabic Scholar, the late M. Fulgenee Fresnel, with whom, during a former residence in Egypt, I had contracted an intimate friendship. Previously informed by me of my project, he had tested the qualifications of several learned natives for the task of assisting me in collecting, transcribing, and collating, the materials from which my lexicon was to be composed; and he recommended to me, as the person whom he esteemed the most fit, the sheykh Ibráheem (surnamed 'Abd-el-Ghaffár) Ed-Dasooḳee. To have engaged as my coadjutor a sheykh respected for this character and learning, and to have been disappointed in him, and obliged to dismiss hi, might have made him my enemy, and enabled and induced him to baffle my scheme; but my experience led me to believe that a person better qualified for the services that I required of him than the sheykh Ibráheem Ed-Dasooḳee, could not have been found by me in Cairo; and I had no occasion to employ any other assistant, except, occasionally, transcribers, under his supervision.

   The assistance that I received from my friend M. Fresnel was not limited to the favour mentioned above. With a generosity rarely equalled, he insisted upon transferring to me the most valuable of his Arabic manuscripts, to remain with me during the whole period of the composition of my lexicon, and in case of this death during that period to become my absolute property. Most deeply do I deplore his not having lived to see how greatly those precious manuscripts have contributed to the accuracy and value of my work, and to have them restored to him. They consist of two copies of the Ṣiḥáḥ and a copy of the Ḳámoos. One of the copies of the former lexicon is a manuscript of extraordinary excellence: it was finished in the year of the Flight 676 (ᴀ.ᴅ. 1277); and forms a large quarto-volume. The other copy of the same lexicon is in three numerous important extracts, in its margins, form the celebrated Annotations of the Ibn-Barree and El-Busṭee: the first volume is similarly enriched, and little inferior to the second in accuracy: the third is of the ordinary quality. The copy of the Ḳámoos, which s written in a very small and compact hand, and forms a single octavo-volume, I believe to be unique: it contains, in its margins, (with other annotations and with various readings,) copious extracts from the great work which is the main source my own lexicon; and its text, of which the transcription was finished in the year of the Flight 1120 (ᴀ.ᴅ. 1708-9), has been carefully collated. These valuable acquisitions I made almost immediately after my arrival at Cairo.

   It was indispensable, I believe, to the success of my undertaking, that I should most carefully avoid whatever might draw down disrespect from the 'Ulamà of Cairo, or others of the Muslim inhabitants, either upon myself or upon the shekyh


##### vi

who was to assist me in procuring the chief materials for the composition of my work. For it was only by his means that I could reasonably hope to obtain the use of manuscripts in the libraries of mosques; that is, by his borrowing those manuscripts as though for his own use: and one of the librarians showed himself to be desirous of urging any pretext in order to refuse the loan of the work that I most needed. I therefore made my place of residence to be as far as I could from the quarters frequented by Franks, and conformed with such of the general usages of the Muslims as did not involve a profession of their religion. But my precautions did not suffice to secure me from every difficulty. Even the Viceroy, Moḥammad 'Alee Páshá, though almost an absolute prince, could not enable me to overcome them. Hearing of my project, I know not how, he spontaneously informed me, by his Prime Minister, that he was desirous of showing his respect from my Patron by rendering me any assistance within his power. I replied that his Highness would very greatly aid me by granting me authority to demand the loan of certain manuscripts in the libraries of mosques. But it was feared that the wardens of the mosques would in this case urge the necessity of an order from the Sulṭán, or abstract considerable portions from those manuscripts and so defeat my plan. I could therefore only endeavour to obtain, according to the usual custom, through the sheykh my assistant, a small portion at a time of each of the required manuscripts: and even this I was unable to do until after the lapse of some weeks. In the mean time, however, I had the good fortune to acquire a large folio-volume, consisting of nearly the whole of the first tenth portion, of a copy of the great work to which I have alluded before as comprising in about one seventh part of its contents of the whole of the celebrated Ḳámoos. This work, entitled "Táj el-'Aroos" (تَاج العَرُوس), a compilation from the best and most copious Arabic lexicons, in the from of a running commentary on the Ḳámoos, with necessary critical and other illustrations, original, and selected from various authors of high repute, fully justified my expectation. I found, from the portion before me, that it would of itself alone suffice to supply the means of composing an Arabic lexicon far more accurate and perspicuous, and incomparably more copious, than any hitherto published in Europe. But I should not have been satisfied with making use of it for such a purpose without being able to refer to several of the most important of the works from which it was compiled.

Of these works, and others particularly deserving of notice, as well as of the Táj el-'Aroos itself, and of the principles of Arabic lexicology, I must now endeavour to give a brief account. In doing this, I shall frequently have occasion to cite the "Muzhir" of Es-Suyooṭee, a compilation of the utmost value to students in general, and more especially to lexicographers, of the Arabic language. Its author died in the year of the Flight 911, a date to be borne in mind in perusing my extracts from it. I possess a most excellent copy of it, (written by a learned man, the sheykh Nạṣr El-Hooreenee, with the exception of a portion which, while he was suffering from an attack of ophthalmia, was written for him by one of his disciples,) transcribed from the best that is known to exist in Cairo, (namely, that of Es-Sejá'ee, in the library of the great mosque El-Azhar,) and enriched with copious original marginal notes.

What is called the classical language of Arabic, often termed by the Arabs "the language of Ma'add," and the language of Muḍar," is a compound of many sister-dialects, very little differing among themselves, which were spoken throughout nearly the whole of the Peninsula before the religion of Moḥammad incited the nation to spread its conquering armies over foreign countries. Before that period, feuds among the tribes, throughout the whole extent of their territory, had prevented the blending of their dialects into one uniform language; but this effect of disunion was counteracted in a great measure by the institution of the sacred months, in which all acts of hostility were most strictly interdicted, and by the annual pilgrimage, which had obtained from time immemorial, and the yearly fair held at 'Okáḍh, at which the poets of various tribes, during a period of about a century before the birth of Moḥammad or perhaps during a somewhat longer period, contended for the need of general admiration.[1](#n1)<a name="j1" />

##### vii

"Ḳatádeh says that the tribe of Ḳureysh used to cull what was most excellent in the dialects of the Arabs, so that their dialect became the most excellent of all." (Táj el-'Aroos, in article عرب: and the like is said in the 9th Section of the Muzhir.) This assertion, however, is not altogether correct: for many of the children of the tribe of Ḳureysh, in the time of Moḥammad, were sent into the desert to be there nursed in order to their acquiring the utmost chasteness of speech. Moḥammad himself was sent to be nursed among the tribe of Saạd Ibn-Bekr Ibn-Hawázin, the descendants of Muḍar, but in the line of the Ḳureysh: and he is said to have urged the facts of his being of Ḳureysh and having grown up among the tribe of Saạd as the grounds of his claim to be the most chaste in speech of the Arabs. It is evident, therefore, that Ḳureysh, in his time, were less chaste in speech than some other tribes; though the truth of this asserted saying of his rests, I believe, only on the authority of a Saạdee, who may have forged it in order to raise the reputation of his own tribe for purity of speech. From distant tribes, Ḳureysh probably borrowed little. The dialect of Ḥimyer, confined mainly to El-Yemen, and allied much more to the Ethiopic and the Hebrew than to the language of Ma'add, contributed to this last language little more than a small proportion of words. For our knowledge of it, which is very scanty, we are chiefly indebted to the researches of M. Fresnel, who discovered a surviving idiom of it, spoken chiefly in the district of Mahreh, between Ḥaḍramowt and 'Omán: hence it has been termed "Mahree;" and from the name of the tribe who speak it, M. Fresnel gave it the appellation of "Ehhkili," or "Ehkili."  The author of the "Miṣbáḥ" (El-Feiyoomee) says, in article مهر, "The language of the people of Mahreh, which is a district of 'Omán, is quick, and scarcely, or not at all intelligible [to other Arabs], and is of the ancient Ḥimyeree."

The language of Ma'add was characterized by its highest degree of perfection, copiousness, and uniformity, in the time of Moḥammad; but it soon after declined, and at length lost almost all that constituted its superiority over the other branches of the Semitic stock in the sates in which these are known to us. It is evident that all the Semitic languages diverged from one form of speech: and the known history of the Arabic is sufficient, I think, to show that the mixture of the several branches of the Shemites, in different degrees, with different foreign races, was the main cause, if not of the divergence, at least of the decay, of their languages, as exemplified by the Biblical Hebrew and Chaldee, and the Christian Syriac. That their divergence also was thus mainly caused, we cannot prove; but that this was the case I do not doubt, judging from the differences in the vocabularies, more especially from the differences of this kind in the Hebrew and Phoenician from the other Semitic languages. The existence of a least one language widely differing the Semitic very long before the age of Moses is proved by the remains of the ancient Egyptian, from the time of Pyramids; a language predominantly Semitic in its grammar, but predominantly Non-Semitic in its vocabulary; and evidently a compound of two heterogenous forms of speech. The opinion, common among the learned of the Arabs, that the Arabic is the offspring of the Syriac, apparently suggested by a comparison of their vocabularies and by false notions of development, is simply absurd, unless by "the Syriac" we understand a lost language very different from that which is know to us by this appellation.[2](#n2) Every language without a written literature tends to decay more than to development by reason of foreign influences; and the history of the Arabic exhibits an instance of decay remarkably rapid, and extraordinary in degree. An immediate consequence of the foreign conquests achieved by the Arabs under Moḥammad's first four successors was an extensive corruption of their language: for the nations that they subdued were naturally obliged to adopt in a great measure the speech of the conquerors, a speech which few persons have ever acquired in such a degree as to be secure from the commission of frequent errors in grammar without learning it from infancy. These nations, therefore, and the Arabs dwelling among them, concurred in forming a simplified dialect, chiefly by neglecting to observe those inflections and grammatical rules which constitute the greatest difficulty of the classical Arabic: in the latter half of the first century of the Flight, this simplified dialect became generally spoken in the foreign towns and villages inhabited by the Arabs; and it gradually became the general language throughout the deserts, as well as the towns and villages, of Arabia itself. That such a change took place, in the language of the Arabs inhabiting foreign towns and villages, at this period, is shown by several anecdotes interspersed in Arabic works, and amply confirmed in

#####viii

the older Arabic lexicons and other lexicological works by instances of the necessity of appeals to contemporary Arabs of the desert, respecting points of grammar, by learned men whose parents lived in the first century of the Flight. The celebrated lexicologist El-Aṣma'ee, who was born in the year of the Flight 123, and lived to the age of 92 or 93, was not a sound grammarian. (See De Sacy's "Anthol. Gr. Ar." p.49 of the Arabic text.) And even Seebaweyh, who was contemporary, during the whole of his comparatively short life, with El-Aṣma'ee, appears to have erred in grammar. (See p. 133 of the present work.) Ibn-Seedeh says, in the "Moḥkam," in art. سرط, (voc سِرَاطٌ,) that El-Aṣma'ee was not a grammarian: and in art. شرب (voce شُرُوبٌ as pl. of شَارِبٌ,) he remarks that Ibn-El-Aạrábee (who calls شروب pl. of شَر CHECK) was ignorant of grammar. In short, not a single instance is known of any one's having acquired a perfect knowledge of the grammar of the classical Arabic otherwise than by being brought up among Arabs who retained that language uncorrupted. The Khaleefeh El-Weleed (who reigned near the close of the first century of the Flight), the son of 'Abd-El-Melik, spoke so corrupt a dialect that he often could not make himself understood by the Arabs of the desert. A ridiculous instance of the mistakes occasioned by his use of the simplified language which is now current is related by Abu-l-Fidà. The rapid progress of the corruption of the language among the learned is the more remarkable when it is considered that many of these, in the first and second centuries of the Flight, were very long-lived: for in a list of the most celebrated Arabic lexicologists and grammarians, in the 48th Section of the Muzhir, the first five whose lengths of life are defined attained the following ages: 92, 74, 93, 96 or 97 or 98 or 99, and 92 or 93: the first of these (Yoonus) was born in the year 90 of the Flight; and the last, in the year 123; this being El-Aṣma'ee. This series of five is broken only by one, whose length of life is not known. In some few spots, the language of Ma'add long lingered; and it may perhaps even survive to the present day; as appears from the following curious statement in the Ḳámoos (article عكد): "'Akád is a certain mountain, near Zebeed, [a well-known city in the western seaboard of El-Yemen,] the inhabitants of which retain the chaste language:" to which is added in the Táj el-'Aroos, that they retain this language "to the present time [the middle of the eighteenth century]: and the stranger remains not with them more than three nights, [the period prescribed by the law for the entertainment of a stranger,] by reason of [their] fear for [the corruption of] their language." But instances of the corruption of the classical Arabic are related (in the 44th Section of the Muzhir) as having occurred even in the life-time of Moḥammad.

Such being the case, it became a matter of the highest importance to the Arabs to preserve the knowledge of that speech which had thus become obsolescent, and to draw a distinct line between the classical and post-classical languages. For the former language was that of the Ḳur-án and of the Traditions of Moḥammad, the sources of their religious, moral, civil, criminal, and political code: and they possessed, in that language, preserved by oral tradition, - for the art of writing, in Arabia, had been almost exclusively confined to Christians and Jews, - a large collection of poetry, consisting of odes and shorter pieces, which they esteemed almost as much for its intrinsic merit as for its value in illustrating their law. Hence the vast collection of lexicons and lexicological works composed by Arabs, and by Muslims naturalised among the Arabs; which compositions, but for the rapid corruption of the language, would never have been undertaken. In the aggregate of these works, with all the strictness that is observed in legal proceedings, as will presently be shown, the utmost care and research have been employed to embody everything that could be preserved or recovered of the classical language; the result being a collection of such authority, such exactness, and such copiousness, as we do not find to have been approached in the case of any other language after its corruption or decay.

The classical language they called, by reason of its incomparable excellence, "el-loghah," or "the language:" and the line between this and the post-classical was easily drawn, on account of the almost sudden commencement, and rapid progress, of the corruption. It was decided by common consent, that no poet, nor any other person, should be taken as an absolute and unquestionable authority with respect to the words or their significations, the grammar, or the prosody, of the classical language, unless he were one who had died before the promulgation of El-Islám, or who had lived partly before and partly after that event; or, as they term it, unless he were a "Jáhilee" or a "Mukhaḍram," or (as some pronounce it) "Mukhaḍrim,"

#####ix

or "Mukḥaḍram," or "Mukḥaḍrim." A poet of the class next after the Mukhaḍrams is termed an "Islámee:" and as the corruption of the language had become considerable in his time ,even among those who aimed at chasteness of speech, he is not cited as an authority absolutely and unquestionably like the two preceding classes. A poet of the next class, which is the last, is termed a "Muwelled:" he is absolutley post-classical; and is cited as an unquestionable authority with respect only to the rhetorical sciences. The commencement of the period of the Muwelleds is not distinctly stated: but it must have preceded the middle of the second century of the Flight; for the classical age may be correctly defined as having nearly ended with the first century, when very few persons born before the establishment of El-Islám through Arabia where living. Thus the best of the Islámee poets may be regarded, and are generally regarded, as holding classical rank, though  not as being absolute authorities with respect to the words and the significations, the grammar, and the prosody, of the classical language. The highest of all authorites, howver, on such points, prosody of course excepted, is held by the Arabs to be the Ḳur-án. The Traditions of Moḥammad are also generally held to be absolute authorites with respect to everything relating to the prose of the classical language; but they are excluded by some from the class of absolute authorities, because traditions may be corrupted in language, and interpolated, and even forged. Women are often cited as authorities of equal rank with men: and in like manner, slaves reared among the Arabs of classical times are cited as authorities equally with such Arabs. (See the word شَاهِدٌ in the present work; and also جَاهِلِىٌّ and مُخَضْرمٌ and إِسْلَامِىٌّ and مُوَلَّدٌ۔۔ .)

The poetry of the Jáhilees and the Mukhaḍrams consists, first, of *odes* (termed قَسَائد, plural قَسِيدَة), which were regarded as complete poems, and which were all designed to be chanted or sung; secondly, of shorter compositions, termed *pieces* (قِطَع, plural of قِطْعَة); many of which were also designed to be chanted or sung; and thirdly, of *couplets*,or *single verses*. In the first of these classes are usually included all poems of more than fifteen verses: but few odes consist of much less than fifty verses or much more than a hundred. Of such poems, none has been transmitted, and none is believed to have existed, of an age more than a few genrations (probably not mroe than three or four or five) anterior to that of Moḥammad. It is said in the 49th Section of the Muzhir, on the authority of Moḥammad Ibn-Selám El-Jumaḥee, that "the pristine Arabs had no poetry except the frew verses which a man would utter in his need: and odes (ḳaṣeedehs) were composed, and poetry made long, only [for the first  time] in the age of 'Abd-El-Muṭṭalib [Moḥammad's grandfather], or Ḥáshim Ibn-'Abd-Menáf [his great-grandfather]." And shortly after, in the same Section of that work, it is said, on the same authority, that "the first who composed poems of this kind was El-Muhelhil Ibn-Rabee'ah Et-Teghilbee, on the subject of the slaughter of his brother Kuleyb:" "he was maternal uncle of Imra-el Ḳeya [3](#n3) Ibn-Ḥojr El-Kindee." "Or, acording to 'Omar Ibn-Shebbeh, each tribe clamed priority for its own poet; and not merely as the author of two or three verses, for such they called not a poem: the Yemáness claimed for Imra-el-Ḳeys; and Benoo-Asad, for 'Abeed Ibn-El-Abraṣ; and Teghlib, for [El-] Muhelhil; and Bekr, for 'Amr Ibn-Ḳamee-ah and El-Muḳḳ El-Akbar; and Iyád, for Aboo-Du-ád: and some assert that El-Afwah El-Azdee was older than these, and was the first who composed ḳaṣeedehs: but these for whom priority in poetry was clamed were nearly contemporary; the oldest of the probably not preceding the Fligh by a hundred years, or thereabout. Thaalab says, in he 'Amálee,' El-Aṣma'ee says that the first of the poets of whom is related a poem extending to thiry versions is [El-] Muhelhil: then, Dhu-eyb Ibn-Kaạb Ibn-'Amr Ibn-Temeem Ibn-Ḍamreh, a man of Benoo-Kináneh; and El-Aḍbaṭ Ibn-Ḳureyạ: and he says, Between these and El-Islám was four hundred years: and Imra-el-Ḳeys was long after these." But this is inconsistent with the assertion of the Ibn-Selám mentioned above, mad alos by En-Näwawẹe in his "Tadheeb el-Asmà," p. 163, that El-Muhelhil was maternal uncle of Imra-el-Ḳeys: and as the majority refer El-Muhelhil to a period of about a century before the Flight, we have a double reason for holding this period (not that of hour hundred years) to be the more probably

#####<a name="x"></a>x

correct. According to Ibn-Ḳuteybeh, the time of Imra-el-Ḳeys was forty years before that of Moḥammad; as is stated in the Calcutta edition of the Mo'allaḳát. M.Fresnel contentds that the honour commonly ascribed to El-Mihelhil is due to Zubeyr Ibn-Jenáb El-Kelbee, of whose poetry at least seventy-nine verses have been preserved, fragments of different poems, including a piece of fifteen verses, of which the first hemistich of the first verse rhymes with the second hemistich, according to rule. But this Zubeyr, during a portion of his life, is related to have been contemporary with El-Muhelhil. In a fragment ascribed to him, he represents himself (if the fragment be genuine) to have lived two hundred years: and one tradition assigns to him a life of two hundred and fifty years; another, four hundred years; and another, four hundred and fifty years! [4](#n4)  —Upon the whole, then, it seems that we may with probability refer the first ḳaṣeedeh to a period with a century and a half, at the utmost, before the Flight.

Moḥammad said, on being asked, "Who is the best of the poets?" "Imra-el-Ḳeys will be the leader of the poets to Hell." And in the general estimation of the Arabs, he is the most excellent of all their poets. Ilis <CHECK> Mo'allaḳah is most especially admired by them. Of the pagan and unbelieving poets who flourised before and during the tiem of Moḥammad, El-Beyḍáwee sarcastically remarks (on chap. xxvi. verses 224 and 225 of the Ḳur-án, in which, and in the verse that next follows, they are censured as seducers, bewildered by amours desire, and vain boasters,) "Most of htir themes are unreal fancies, and their words chiefly relate to the description of the charms of women under covert, and amorous dalliance, and false arrogations or professions, and the rending of reputations, and the impugning of the legitimacy of parentages, and false threatening, and vain boasting, and the praise of such as don not deserve it, with extravagance therein." The like is also sain the Keshsháf, (in the same passage of the Ḳur-án,) and in too large a degree we must admit it to be just; but it is very far from being unexceptionable. The classical poetry is predominantly objective, sensuous, and passionate; with little imagination, or fancy, except in relation to phantoms, or spectres, and to jinn, or genii, and other fabulous beings; and much less artificial than most of the later poetry, many of the authors of which, lacking the rude spirit of the Bedawees, aimed chiefly at mere elegancies of diction, and plays upon words. Generally speaking, in the classical poetry, the descriptions of nature, of the life of the desert, of night-journeyings and day-journeyings, with their various incidents, of hunting, and stalking, and lurking for game, of the tending of camels, of the gathering of wild honey, and similar occupations, are most admirable. And very curious and interesting, as will be shown by many citations in the present work, are its frequent notices (mostly by early Muslim poets) of the superstitions that characterized, in the pagan times, the religion most generally prevailing throughout Arabia; in which, with the velief in a Supreme Deity,  with strange notions of a future state, and with angelolatry, astrolatry, and idolatry, was combined the lowest kind of fetishism, chiefly the worship of rocks and stones and trees, probably learned from Negroies, of whom the Arabs have always had great numbers as slaves, and with whom they have largely intermixed. Sententious language consisting of parallel clauses, like that of the so-called "poetical books" of the Bible, was probably often employed by the Arabs of every age. It seems to be almost natural to their race when exited by eloquence. But the addition of rhyme in this style of language appears to have become common in the later times. Moḥammad Ibn-Eṭ-Ṭeiyib El-Fásee says (in article ضطب of his Annotations on the Ḳámoos) that the oration termed ضُطْبَة, in the Pagan and the early Muslim ages, was, in most instances, not in rhyming prose. The remains of classical prose are often used as authorities; but being more liable to corruption, they are regarded as less worthy of reliance than the poetry.[5](#n5)

#####xi

Such are the principal original sources from which the Arabic lexcons and lexicological works have been derived. Another source consisted of phrases and single words transmitted from the Arabs of classical times, or from the later Arabs of the dsert who were believed (though they were not regarded as unquestionable authorities) to have retained the pure language of their ancestors. The earlier of the are often called, by the lexicologists, العَرَبُ العَلرِبَةُ; as in the 1st Section of the Muzhir, where it is said that the transmission (النَّقْلُ) should be "from such as لعرب العلربة, like [the descendants of] Ḳaḥṭán and Ma'add and 'Adnán; not from those after them; after the corruption of their language, and the varying of the Muwelleds." El-Jowharee, as will presently be seen, applies the appellation  لعرب العلربة even to the desert-Arabs of his own time; but in doing so, he deviates from the general usage of the lexicologists. As is said in the 6th SEction of the Muzhir, the transmitter must be a trustworthy person; but may be a woman, and may be a slave, as we have before stated. The degrees of credit to which the phrases and words thus transmitted are entitled are distinguished by ranging them in the following classes: 1st, (as is stated in the 3rd Section of Muzhir,) the term مُتَوَاتِرٌ is applied to that which has been transmitted by such a number of persons as cannot be supposed to have agreed to a falsehood: 2ndly, آحَادٌ (plural of أَحَدٌ), to what have been transmitted by some of the lexicologists, but wanting in that which is required to justify the application, thereto, of the former term; and what is thus transmitted is also termed مَظْنُونٌ <FIX>:3rdly, (as is said in the 5th Section) مَفْرَادٌ (plural of فَرْدٌ), to what have been transmitted by only one of the lexicologists; and what is thus transmitted, if the transmitter is a person of exactness, as Aboo-Zeyd and El-Khaleel and others, is admitted: 4thly, (as is said in the 15th Section,) مَفَارِيدُ (plural of مَفْرُودٌ), to words known to be spoken only by one Arab. It was only when all the other sources failed to supply what was wanted, that recourse was had, by the writers of lexicons and lexicological works, to contemporary Arabs of the desert; and I do not find that much reliance was often placed upon these after the end of the third century of the Flight. El-Jowharee, who died near the close of the next century, states, in the short preface to his "Ṣiḥáḥ," that what he had collected in El-'Iráḳ for his lexicon he "rehearsed by lip to [those whom he terms] العَرَب العَارِبَة in their abodes in the desert (البَادِبَة):" <CHECK> but this he seems to have done rather to satisfy any doubts that he may have had, and to obtain illustrations, that with the view of taking such persons as authorities for words or phrases or signifcations. It is related ot Aboo-Zeyd, in the 7th Section of the Muzhir, that he said, "I do not say 'the Arabs say' unless I have heard it from these: Bekr Ibn-Hawázin and Benoo-Kiláb and Benoo-Hilál; or from [the people of] the higher portion of the lower region, or [of] the lower of the higher:" [6](#n6) and that Yoonus used the expression "the Trustworthy (الثِّقَةُ) told me from the Arabs;" that being asked, "Who is the Trustworthy?" he answered, "Aboo-Zeyd;" and being asked, "And wherefore dost thou not name him?" he answered, "He is a tribe, so I do not name him." [7](#n7)

Most of the contents of the best Arabic lexicons was committed to writing, or to the memories of students, in the latter half of the second century of the Flight, or in the former half of the next century. Among the most celebrated lexicological

#####xii

works, general and special, of thie period, are the "'Eyn," commonly ascribed ot El-Khaleel, who died in the year of the Fligh 160 or 17- or 175 (aged 74); the "Nawádir" of El-Kisá-ee, who died in 182 or 183 or 189 or 192; the "Jeem" and the "Nawádir" and the work entitled "El-Ghareeb el-Muṣannaf" of Aboo-'Amr Esh-Sheybánee, who died in 205 or 206 or 212 (aged 110 or 111 or 118); the "Nawádir" and the "Loghát" of El-Farrà, who died in 207 (aged 67); and the "Loghát" of Aboo-'Obeydeh, who died in 208 or 209 or 210 or 211 (aged 96 or 97 or 98 or 99); the "Nawádir" and the "Loghát" of Aboo-Zeyd, who died in 214 or 215 or 216 (aged 93); the "Ajnás" of El-Aṣma'ee, who died in 215 or 216 (aged 92 or 93); the work entitled "El-Ghareeb el-Muṣannaf" of Aboo-'Obeyd, who died in 223 or 224 or 230 (aged 67); and the "Nawádir" of Ibn-El-Aạrábee, who died in 231 or 233 (aged 81 or 83): all mentioned near the close of the 1st Section of the Muzhir. From these and similar works, either immediately or through the medium of others in which they are cited, and form oral tradition, and, as long as it could be done with configence, by collecting information from Arabs of the desert, were composed all the best lexicons, and commentaries on the classical poets &c. The most authoritative of such works are the lexicons; and most authoritative of thse are, of course, generally spearking, the later, because every succeeding lexicographer profited by the critical research of his predecessors, and thus avoided or corrected errors committed by earlier authors. The commentaries on the poets and on the Traditions have contributed largely to the lexicons. They often present explanations othat habve been disallowed ore questioned by eminent lexicographers; and therefore their statements, when unconfirmed by other authorities, must be received with caution: but in many cases their explanations are unquestionably accurate, and the afford valuable aid by giving examples of words and phrases of doubtful meanings. The danger of relying upon a single authority, however high that authority may be, in any matter of Arabic lexicology, will be shown by innumeralbe instances in the present work. I here speak of erros of judgement. In addition to these, we have mistranscriptions. A word once mistranscribed is repeated in copy after copy; and at length, from its having been found in several copies, is confidently reported as correct.[8](#n8) The value of the larger and later and more estemeed lexicons cannot, therefore, be too highly rated.

The first of the general lexicons is that which is commonly ascribed to El-Khaleel, entitled the "'Eyn'" (كِتَاب العَيْن); and this has served in a great measure as the basis of many others. In it the words are mentioned according to their radical letters, as in all the best lexicons; but the letters are arragned, with the exception of ا and ى, which are classed with و for obvious reasons, nearly in the order of their places of utterance, as follows; commencing with ع (whence the title):

<div align="center">
ع ح ه خ غ ق ك د ش ض ص س ز ط د ت ظ ذ ث ر ل ن ف ب م و ا ى
</div>
<br/>

Under each of the letters, in the foregoing order, except the last three which are necessarily classed togehter, are mentioned all the words of which the roots contain that letter without any letter of those preceding it in this arrangement: first, the biliteral-radical words: the, the triliteral-radical; of which are placed fir the second; secondly the unsound in one letter; and thirdly the unsound in two letters: next, the quadriliteral-radical: and lastly, the quinqueliteral-radical. Thus, under the letter ع are mentioned all the words of which the roots contain that letter: under ح, all the words of which the roots contain that letter without ع: under ه, all of which roots contain that letter without ع or ح: and so on. For instance, in the section of the letter ل, we find, in the first division, first, لن; then, لف and فل; and so on: and in the second divison, first, نفل

#####xiii
and فلن; then, لبن and نبل; and so on: all the combinations of the same radical letters being arranged consecutively; and the same order of letters beging observed in all cases. Respecting the question of its authorship, which is involved in much uncertainty, I have gathered from the 1st Sectio nof the Muzhir what here follows. Es-Seeráfee says that El-Khaleel composed the first part of the 'Eyn. But most men deny [absolutely] its being his composition. Some say that it is by Leyth [or El-Leyth] Ibn-Naṣr Ibn-Seiyár El-Khurásánee. El-Azheree says that El-Leyth composed it, and ascribed it to El-Khaleel in order that it might becom in much request. Some say that El-Khaleel composed the portion from the beginning to the end of the letter ع, and El-Leyth completed it; and there is is that the first part does not resemble the rest. Ibn-El-Moạtezz relates, on the authority of the "Moạjam el-Udabà" of Yáḳoot El-Ḥamawee, that El-Khaleel made himself solely and peculiarly an associate of El-Leyth; and when he composed the 'Eyn, assigned it to him: that El-Leyth held it in very great estimation, and gave him a hundred thousand [dirhems]; and committed the half of it to memory:[9](#n9) but it happend that he purchased a highly-prized female slaave, who, becoming jealous of the daughter of his parternal uncle [i.e. of his wife], and desiring to enrage him, which she could not do with respect to money as he would not care for her doing this, burned that book: and as non one else possessed a copy of it, and El-Khaleel had then died, El-Leyth dictated the half that he retained in his memory, and employed persons to complete it uniformly with that half: and they made this composition which is in the hands of men. To account fo the mistakes occurring in the 'Eyn, Thaạlab says, "El-Khaleel sketched it out, but did not fill it up; and had he filled it up, he had spared nothing in it; for El-Khaleel was a man of whom the like has not been seen: certain learned men filled it up, on whose authority nothing has been related." It is also said that El-Khaleel composed, of this book, only the section of the letter ع, and his companion El-Leyth composed the rest, and named himself "El-Khaleel" [i.e. "the friend"]; and that when he says, in the book, "El-Khaleel Ibn-Aḥmad says," it is El-Khaleel; and when he says, absolutely, "El-Khaleel says," he speaks of himself: and that every flaw in the book is from him; not from Eh-Khaleel. En-Nawawee says that [according to some of the learned] the 'Eyn ascribed to El-Khaleel is only what El-Leyth collected from El-Khaleel.[10](#n10) The mistakes in the 'Eyn are numerous; and there are many interpolations in copies thereof. Several authors have applied themselves to point out and correct these faults: some, in works specially devoted to this object: some, in abridgments of the 'Eyn or in other lexicons. But in general the mstakes are confined ot matters of inflection and derivation; not extending to the insertion of false or unknown words: and such mistakes are of light account.[11](#n11)

The following notices of other celebrated lexicons, composed after the 'Eyn, so far as to include the Ḳámoos, I borrow chiefly from the same section of the Muzhir; distinguising my own additions by enclosing them within square brackets.

Among the celebrated lexicons composed after the model of the 'Eyn, is the "Jemharah" of Ibn-Dureyd, [who is said to have died in the year of the flight 321, and to have lived 93 years.] Some say that it is one of the best of lexicons; and it has been taken as an authority by Aboo-'Alee El-Fárisee and Aboo-'Alee El-Ḳálee and Es-Seeráfee and other eminent authors. Ibn-Jinnee disparages it for faults similar to those of the 'Eyn: and Nifṭaweyh, whome Ibn-Dureyd had satirized, pronounced it to be untrustworthy; but without justice.

#####xiv


The "Tahdheeb" of El-Azharee, [who was born in the year of the Flight 282, and died in the year 370 or 371. This is a very excellent lexicon, and one from which I have largely drawn, immediately and through the medium of Lisán el-'Arab and of the Táj-el-'Aroos. Its arrangement is the same as that of the 'Eyn, which it calls "the book of El-Leyth," and from which its contents are in a great measure derived. I possess a large portion of this work in a volume of the "Tahdheeb et-Tahdheeb;" and a small portion, constisting of 193 pages, of a copy in a large 8vo, corresponding to a part of the former.]

The "Moḥeeṭ" of Ṣáḥib Ibn-'Abbád. [Ibn-Khillikán  [12](#n12) states that he was born in the year of the Flight 326, and died in 385: and describes this work as "in seven volumes; arranged in the order of the letters of the alphabet; copious in words, buth having few confirmatory examples:" thus resemb,ing the Ḳámoos. Much has been drawn from it in my own lexicon.]

The "Mujmal" of Ibn-Fáris, [who died in the year of the Flight 390 or 395.] He restricted himself, in his lexicon, to the mention of genuine words; excluding the unfamiliar and ignored; on the authority of oral tradition, and from books of good repute; aiming, as he says, at abridgment and conciseness. [His work is highly esteemd. The arrangement is the of the usual order of the letters of the alphabet.]

The "Ṣiḥáḥ," or same call it, "Ṣaḥáḥ," of El-Jowharee, [commonly, now, pronounced "El-Jóharee," who died, according to Abu-l-Fidà, in the year of the Flight 398, and "was from Fáráb, a city of the country of the Turks, beyond the river," that is, beyong the Seyhoon: or according to Ibn-Esh-Shiḥneh, he died in the year 397, as I find in two copies of history in my possession: or, according to Ḥájjee Khaleefeh, in 393.] Et-Tebreezee says that it is commonly known by the title of the مِحَاح which is pl. of مَحِيح; but that some call it the مَحَاح, which is synonymous with مَحِيح. As its title imports, the author restricted himself to the mention of genuine words, like Ibn-Fáris, this contemporary. [But his hexicon is far more comprehensive, and more excellent in every respect, that that of Ibn-Fáris.] AS he says in his preface, he composed it in order which none  had pursued, [mentioning each word according to the place of last letter of the root, and then the first and second, in the usual order of the alphabet,] after collecting the contents in El-'Iráḳ, and rehearsing them by lip [as I have before mentioned] to [those to whom he terms] اٱعَرَب العَارِبَة in their abodes in the desert (البَادِيَة). Eth-Tha'álibee says that he was one of the wonders of the age. His lexicon, however, is not free from instances of inadvertence or mistakes, like all great books; and such as cannot be attributed to copyists. Yáḳoot says, in the "Moạjam el-Udabà," that the cause of the mistranscriptions in it was this: when he had composed it, it was read to him as far as [the section of] the letter ض, and an evil suggestion occurred to his mind, in consequence of which he cast himself from a housetop, and died: so the rest of the book remained a rough draught, not pruned, or trimmed, nor fairly copied out; and his disciple Ibráheem Ibn-Ṣáliḥ El-Warráḳ made a fair copy of it, and committed mistakes in some places in it. Ibn-Barree wrote a commentary, or series of annotations, (حَوَاشٍ, plural of حَاشِيَةٌ,) on the Ṣiḥáḥ, [an extremely valuable work] in which he reached the middle [of the section] of the letter س ; and the sheykh 'Abd-Allah Ibn-Moḥammad El-Busṭee completed it. [But I have invariably found passages from every part of it cited as the says of Ibn-Barree.] And Eṣ-Ṣaghánee, or, as he is called by some, Eṣ-Ṣághánee, wrote a Tekmileh (تَكْمِلَة, i.e. a Supplement)to the Ṣiḥáḥ; exceeding it in bulk. [Some further remarks on the Ṣiḥáḥ (my own copies of which have already been described) will be found in my account of the Ḳámoos. The abridgement entitle "Mukhtár eṣ-Ṣiḥáḥ" is well known: it is too scanty to be of much use except to those who desire to commit to memory the most usual words and significations. A very superior abridgment is the "Jámi" of the seyyid Moḥammad Ibn-es-seyyid-Ḥasan, which was finished, according to Ḥájjee Khaleefeh, in the year of the Flight 854. It is copious, well digested, and enriched with additions from the Mughrib of El-Muṭarrizee, the Fáiḳ of Es-Zamakhsherre, the Niháyeh of Ibn-El-Atheer, &c. Of this work I possess of very good copy.]

#####xv

The "Jámi'" of El-Ḳazzáz, [who died in the year of the Fligh 412. Ḥájjee Khaleefeh mentions it as "an esteemed book, but rare." It is not unfrequently cited in the Táj el-'Aroos.]

The "Moo'ab" (thus, with fet-ḥ to the غ,) of Aboo-Ghálib Ibn-Temám, [or, according to Ibn-Khillikán, Abool-Ghálib Temám,] known by the appellation of Ibn-Et-Teiyánee, [who died in the year of the Flight 436;] a work of very great utility, consisting of what is correct of the  contents of the 'Eyn, not omitting anything of the confirmatory examples from the Ḳur-án and Traditions and the genuine poems of the Arabs, but rejecting what it contains of examples respecting which there is disagreement, and of mistranscribed words, and faulty formations; and adding what Ibn-Dureyd has added in the Jemharah. It is rarely found; for people have not persevered in transcribing it, but have rahter inclined to the Jemharah of Ibn-Dureyd and Moḥkam of Ibn-Seedeh and the Jámi' of El-Ḳazzáz and Ṣiḥáḥ &c.

The "Moḥkam" of Ibn-Seedeh the Andalusian, who was blind, [as was also his father; and who died in the year of the Flight 458, aged abount 60 years.] This is the greatest of the lexicological books [i.e. of the lexicons] composed since the age of the Ṣiḥáḥ [to the time of the author of the Muzhir, of those known to him. It follows the arrangement of the 'Eyn; and it is held in very high estimation for it copiousness, its accuracy, its critical remarks, and its numerous examples from classical poets. In copiousness and in some other respects, it is superior, and in others hardly (if at all) inferior, to the Ṣiḥáḥ. It is one of the two chief sources of the Ḳamoos; the other being the 'Obáb of Eṣ-Ṣaghánee: and I have drawn from it very largely, both immediately and through the medium of the Lisán el-'Arab and of the Táj el-'Aroos, for my own lexicon. I possess the last fifth part of it in a volume of the "Tahdheeb et-Tahdheeb;" and another large portion, and a smaller portion, of a most admirable copy which has been dispersed, written in the year of the Flight 675, for the library of a Sulṭán, apparently the celebrated Beybars.]

[The "Asás" of Ez-Zamamkhsheree, who was born in the year of the Fligh 467, and died in 538. This lexicon is a very excellent repertory of choice and chaste words and phrases; and espectially and peculairarly valuable as comprising a very large collection of trpoical signifcations, distinguised as such, which has greatly contributed, by indirectly illustrating proper significations as well as otherwise, to the value of my own lexicon, as my numerous citations of it will show, althought I have generally been obliged to draw from it through the medium of the Táj el-'Aroos, which often does not name it in quoting it. Its order is the same as that of the Mujmal, apparently in most copies: but some, which are said to be abridged, follow the order of Ṣiḥáḥ.]

[The "Mughrib" of El-Muṭarrizee, who was born in Khuwárezm, in the yeaer of the Flight 536, and died in 610. This is a lexicon of select words and phrases, and particularly of such as occur in books of Traditions, and other works relating to the law. It forms a very valuable companion and supplement to the other lexicons; and I have constantly consulted it and drawn from it in composing the present work. Its arrangement of the roots is that of the usual order of the alphabet, with respect to the first, second, and third letters of each. I possess a very excellent copy of it, written in the year of the Flight 977, presented to me by the Rev. J.R.T. Lieder, late of the English Church-Mission in Cairo.]

The "'Obáb" of Eṣ-Ṣaghánee, or Eṣ-Ṣághánee, [who was born in the year of the Flight 577, and died in 660, according to the Muzhir (48th Section), or, as is said in the Táj el-'Aroos (art. صغن), in 655, on the authority of one who attended his funeral.] This, afther the Moḥkam, is the greatest of the lexicological works composed since the age of the Ṣiḥáḥ [to the time of the author of the Muzhir, of those known to him. It was left unfinished. If, as I believe is the case, it follow the order of the Ṣiḥáḥ, the portion completed was somewhat more that three fourths; for] the author reached, in it, the section of بكم: which occasioned the saying,


<div align="center">
* إِنَّ الصَّغَانِىَّ  آلَّذِى  *  حَازَ آٱْعُلُومَ وَآلْحِكَمْ  * كَانَ قُصَارَى * أَنِ آنْتَهَى إِلَى بَكَمْ *
</div>
<br/>

#####xvi

["Verily Eṣ-Ṣaghánee, who mastered the sciences and the doctrines of philosophy, the utmost of his case was that he reached to بَكَم," which signifies "dumbness," &c. —Though a man of extensive learning, he was opiniative, and addicted to unjust criticism of his superiors. A copy of the 'Obáb, and a copy of the same author's Supplement to the Ṣiḥáḥ, before mentioned, used by the author of the Táj el-'Aroos, belonged to the library of the the mosque of the Emeer Ṣarghatmish, in Cairo; but on my causing an inquiry to be made for them, the librarian declared that they were no longer found there. They have probably been stolen; or had not been returned by the author Táj el-'Aroos when he died; on which occasion, it is said, his house was plundered of the books &c. that he left.]


[The "Lisán el-'Arab" of the Ibn-Mukarram, who was born in the year of the Flight 630, and died in 711. In the copy of his lexicon in the library of the collegiate mosque called the "Ashrafeeyeh," in Cairo, constisting of the twenty-eight quarto-volumes, he is styled "Jemál-ed-Deen Moḥammad Ibn-esh-sheykh-el-imám-el-marḥoom-Jelál-ed-Deen-Abi-l-'Izz-Mukarram Ibn-esh-sheykh-Nejeeb-ed-Deen-Abi-l-Ḥasan-El-Anṣáree:" but in the Táj el-'Aroos, he is almost always called in Ibn-Manḍhoor (اِبْن مَنْظُور). I shall give an account of this great work in describing the Táj el-'Aroos.]

[The "Tahdheeb et-Tahdheeb" of Maḥmood Et-Tanookhee, who died in the year of the Flight 723. It is a combination of the contents of the Moḥkam and Tahdheeb (the former occupying the first place in each article) with a few additions from other sources. Thus it forms one of the best and most comprehensive of the Arabic lexicons, without any exceptions known to me but the Lisán el-'Arab and the Táj el-'Aroos. Of the original autograph copy of this work, in five full-page large quarto-volumes, I possess the last volume, constisting of 501 pages. I made a diligent search for the other volumes, but without success.]

[The "Miṣbáḥ" of El-Feiyoomee (Aḥmad Ibn-Moḥammad Ibn-'Alee El-Muḳri). Its full title is "El-Miṣbáḥ el-Muneer fee Ghareeb esh-Sharḥ el-Kebeer." This is a lexicon similar to the Mughrib, above mentioned; but much more comprehensive; forming a most valuable companion and supplement to the larger lexicons. Notwithstanding its title, it comprises a very large collection of classical words and phrases and significations of frequent occurrence; in many instances with more clear and full explanations than I have found elsewhere. I have therefore constantly drawn from it in composing my own lexicon; possessing a very accurate copy of it, a full-paged quarto-volume of 742 pages. Its author states in it that he finished its composition in the year of the Flight 734.]

[The "Mughnee" as it is commonly called, or "Mughni-l-Lebeeb," of the celebrated grammarian Ibn-Hishám, who was born in the year of the Fligh 708, and died in 761 or the following year. A large work, where a little more that one half consists of an elaborate lexicon of the particles and similar words, for which it is my chief authority, as it was, also, that of the author of the Ḳámoos, whose explanations of the particles are, however, very meagre and unsatisfactory. I am fortunate in possessing a most excellent copy of it, a quarto-volume of 609 pages.]


The "Ḳámoos" of El-Feyroozábádee, [or, as some pronounce it, El-Feeroozábádee, (from the city of Férózábád, or Feerózábád, pronounced by the Arabs Feyroozábád,) who was born in the year of the Flight 729, and died in 816.[13](#n13) This, after the Moḥkam and 'Obáb, is the greatest of the lexicological works composed since the age of the Ṣiḥáḥ [to the time of the author of the Muzhir, of those known to him]: but none of the three [he adds] has attained to be as much used as the Ṣiḥáḥ; nor has the rank of the Ṣiḥáḥ, nor its celebrity, been diminished by the existence of these; because it is restricted to what is genuine, so that it is, among the books of lexicology, like the Ṣaḥeeḥ of El-Bukháree among the books


#####xvii

of traditions; for the point upon which turns the title to reliance is not the copiousness of the collection, but of the condition of genuineness, or correctness. [The judgement thus expressed, as to the rank and celebrity of the Ṣiḥáḥ, in comparison with the Ḳámoos, I have found to agree with the opinion of the most learned men among the Arabs with whom I have been acquainted. But to insinuate that the words and significations added in the latter of these lexicons to those of the former are generally less genuine, or less correctt, is not just: they may be truly said to be generally less chaste, inasmuch as they are less usual: but their collector has undoubtedly rendered a great service to the students of Arabic by these additions, which have of late years caused the copies of his lexicon to become much more numerous than those of the Ṣiḥáḥ. The value of the Ṣiḥáḥ consists in its presenting a very judicious collection of the most chaste words, with critical illustrations from the best of the lexicologists, and examples from the best of the classical poets. The Ḳámoos is little more than what may be termed an enormous vocabulary; a collection of words and significations from preceding lexicons and similar works, (for otherwose, according to the principles of Arabic lexicology as universally taught, they would be of no authority,) mainly from the Moḥkam and 'Obáb; with very few critical observations, many of which are false,  [14](#n14) and scarcely any examples from the poets.. Thus it resembles the Moḥeeṭ of Ibn-'Abbád, before mentioned. In order to make room for his numerous additions, desiring that the bulk of his book should be nearly the same as that of the Ṣiḥáḥ, the author has often abridged his explanations in such a manner as to render them unintelligible to the most learned of the Arabs, and has omitted much of what is most valuable of the contents of the latter work. But he has frequently deviated from his usual practice for the purpose of inserting criticisms of others, without acknowledgement, and apparently some few of his own, upon points in the Ṣiḥáḥ in which its author is asserted to have erred; and this he has often done so as to lead to the belief that the author of the Ṣiḥáḥ has affirmed what he has merely quoted from another. Many of the criticisms I have found to have been borrowed from the Annotations on the Ṣiḥáḥ by Ibn-Barree and El-Busṭee, or from the Supplement to the Ṣiḥáḥ by Eṣ-Ṣaghánee: generally when they are false, (which is often the case,) though sometimes when they are correct, from the latter of these works. I have felt it to be my duty to make these remarks in defense of El-Jowharee, and for the sake of truth. Abundant proofs of their correctness will be found in my own lexicon. They may suprise many, who have not know the fact that the Ḳámoos is very little more that an abridged compilation from other works: and another fact, to be mentioned in the next paragraph, which will be in a measure supplementary to the brief account of the Ḳámoos, will probably surprise them more.—This is the latest of the lexicons noticed in the Muzhir: therefor I hav no further occasion for the use of the square brackets to distinguish my own statements or opinions from those of the author of that work, which has thus far afforded me so much aid in my account of the principles of Aarabic lexicology, and of the most celebrated Arabic lexicons, as well as in my remarks on the history of the language. My own, most valuable, manuscript-copy of the Ḳámoos, which I have already described, has been of very great use to me, though its text is generally most correctly given in the Táj el-'Aroos. I have also constantly had before me the edition printed at Calcutta. This is certainly more accurate that most of the manuscript-copies; but it contains countless false readings, which show that, in many instances, the editor, notwithstanding his unquestionable learning and his possession of eleven copies, did not understand what he edited. It seems that he must often have given the worst of the readings of this originals, from neglecting to study the passages in which they occur. I have not thought it necessary to mention *all* of the false readings in his edition; but I have mentioned *many* of them.]

The "Lámi'" of El-Feyroozábádee. Its full title is "El-Lámi' el-Moạlam el-'Ojáb el-Jámi' beyn el-Moḥkam wa-l-'Obáb." From some of the words in the preface to the Ḳámoos, it has been inferred that the author of that work had composed a lexicon in sixty volumes, bearing the foregoing title, from which, chiefly, he composed, or abridged, the Ḳámoos, in tow volumes. But in a very learned work, of Annotations on the Ḳámoos, by Moḥammad Ibn-Eṭ-Ṭeiyib El-Fásee, it is clearly


#####xviii
<a name="n1">1.</a>Respecting this fair, see some extracts from the first of M. Fresnel's "Lettres sur l'Histoire des Arabes avant l'Islamisme" in Note 18 to the first chapter of my Translation of the Thousand and one Nights.


<a name="n2">2.</a>Many among the Jews, the Syrians, and the Fathers of the Christian Church, held that the Aramaic or the Syriac was the language of Adam.


<a name="n3">3.</a> This name is generally pronounced thus, or "Imr-el-Ḳeys," by the learned among the Arabs in the present day; for most of them regard it as pedantic to pronounce proper names in the classical manner. The classical pronunciation is "Imraü-l-Ḳeys" and "Imrauü-l-Ḳeys" and "Imrau-l-Ḳeys;" in the last instance without hemzeh, because (as is said in the Tahdheeb and Táj el-'Aroos on the authority of El-Kisá-ee and El-Farrà) this letter is often dropped.

<a name="n4">4.</a> See the first and second and third of M. Fresnel's "Lettres sure l'Histoire des Arabes avant l'Islamisme:" the second and third in the "Journal Asiatique," 3rd Series, vols 3 and 5.


<a name="n5">5.</a> Those who desire to pursue the study of the history of classical Arabic beyond the limits to which I have here confined my remarks, together with that of its sister-languages, will find much learned and valuable information in M. Renan's "Histoire Générale et Système Comparé des Langues Sémitiques;" though his scepticism in relation to questions merely philological (aw well as to sacred matters) is often, in my opinion, ill-ground and unreasonable. I must particularly remark upon his erroneous assertion to the ancient religions of Arabia, and hence appear to have been expurgated by Muslims, so as to efface all traces of paganism. Many of such allusions, by pagan poets, might be adduced from lexicons, grammars, and scholia; and some examples of them will be found in the present work, in articles دور and عز and مور &c.; the first of these from the Mo'allaḳah of Imra-el-Ḳeys. It would have been strange, indeed, if this had not been the case: for, except the Ḳur-án, nothing was so highly prized by the lexicologists as the pagan poetry; every fragment of it was mast valuable in their estimation, and most carefully sought after and preserved; and the intentional corruption of it the regarded as almost a crime.

<a name="n6">6.</a> "Aboo-'Amr said, 'The most chaste in speech, of men, are the higher [in respect of territory] of [the tribe of] Temeem, and the lower of [the tribe of] Ḳeys;' and Aboo-Zeyd said, 'The most chaste of speech, of men, are [the people of] the lower portion of the higher region, and the higher of the lower,' meaning the rear of [the tribe of] Hawázin; the people of the higher region being the people of El-Medeeneh, and those around it, and those next it, and those near it, whose dialect he held to be not the same as that [of Hawázin]." (Muzhir, 49th Section.) According to the Ḳámoos, the higher region (العَالِيَة) is "what is above Nejd, to the land of Tihámeh, to the part behind Mekkeh; and certain towns, or villages, outside El-Medeeneh."

<a name="n7">7.</a> The exclusion of post-classical words and significations in the best Arabic lexicons, or their specification as such when they occur therein, is of very great important to us in the use that we are often obliged to make of those lexicons in interpreting the Hebrew Scriptures. Thus the triumph of El-Islám, by occasioning the corruption of the Arabic language and the composition of such lexicons, has rendered us a most signal service. I have seldom noticed correspondences between the Arabic on the one side and the Hebrew and other Semitic languages on the other, because, though these are often illustrated by means of the comparable copiousness of the Arabic, the Arabic is rarely illustrated by them, and because we have no such authorities for the interpretation of those languages as we have for the interpretation of the Arabic.


<a name="n8">8. </a> For instance, M. Fresnel quoted (in the second of histr "Lettres sur l'Histoire des Arabes avant l'Islamisme," in the "Journal Asiatique," 3rd Series, vol. iii. pp. 330 et seq.,) an extract from the "Kitáb el-Aghánee," as containing, in the phrases ولدته تينا ما حملت واحدا منهم تصعا ولا, two words supposed by him, and by his and my learned friend the sheykh Moḥammad 'Eiyád Eṭ-Ṭanṭáwee, (see pp. 324 et seq. of that letter,) to be wanting in all the Arabic dictionaries. One of these words is written تصعا, as above, in one of M. Fresnel's copies of the "Kitáb el-Aghánee," three in number; in another copy, تضعا; and in the third copy, قضعا: the other is in all the copies تينا, as above: and they are explained in that work, on the authority of Abu-l-Yaḳḍhán El-Joạfee, as meaning فى دُبُر الطُّهْر وُقُبل الحَيْض and ان تخرج رجلاه قبل راسه. The former word is correctly تُضْعًا or تُضُعًا, both infinitive nouns of وَضَعَتْ. The other word is a mistranscription for يَتْنًا. My lamented friend M. Fresnel was glad to receive and admit a correction of any of his own *rare* mistakes; and in his "Fourth Letter" he announced the the sheykh Moḥammad had afterwards rectified these two errors.

 <div align="center">
      *   كَفَى المَرْءَ نُبْلًا أَنْ تُعَدَّ مَعَايِبُهْ   *

 </div>
 <br/>


<a name="n9">9. </a> Many of the Arabs have been remarkable for a tenacity of memory almost miraculous. Several of them are related to have composed and dictated from memory large works, including even lexicons. At school, they generally learn the whole of Ḳur-án by heart, aided to do so by its composed in rhyming prose: and many students, among them, when uabled to purchase works necessary to them, borrow such works, a portion at a time, from the libraries of the mosques, and commit thier entire contents to memory. Hence, in numerous instances, the variations in copies of the same Arabic work; copies being often written from the dictation of persones who have learning a work by heart.


<a name="n10">10. </a> En-Nawawee also says, (see the printed edition of his Biographical Dictionary, page 231,) that, according to some of the learned, "much of what El-Azheree has transcribed in the Tahdheeb el-Loghah from the Eyn is of the mistakes of Leyth:" but this is inconsistent with the estimation in which the Tahdheeb is held by lexicographers of the highest repute. El-Azheree often points out what he terms mistakes of El-Leyth, and corrects them.

<a name="n11">11. </a> In the present work, whatever is given as on the authority of El-Leyth is from the 'Eyn; I believe, through the medium of the Tahdheeb of El-Azheree, except, perhaps, in a very few instances: and from the 'Eyn also is generally derived (probably in almost every instance) what is given as on the authority of El-Khaleel.

<a name="n12">12. </a> I have the express authority of the Táj el-'Aroos (in art. خلك) for thus writing the name of this author.


<a name="n13">13. </a> It is stated at the end of article وجد in the Táj el-'Aroos that the author of the Ḳámoos wrote at the end of the first volume of the second copy of that work made by his own hand, which volume ended with the article above mentioned, that he finished the transcription of that volume in Dhu-l-Ḥijjeh 768.

<a name="n14">14. </a> The judgement and memory of its author are often in fault: for instance, in article بيض he disallows the expression الأ يَّامُر الِبيضُ, and in وضح he uses it; and in article ضح he disallows ضِيحٌ as syn. with ضِحٌّ, and in article ضىيح he authorizes it: and many similar instances might be mentioned.
